The question and answer video with Erik Larson and the discussion video about In the Garden of Beasts both presented by C-SPAN cleared up several important issues in the book. First, the videos explained the different roles of Herman Göring, who was a flying ace and a leading member of the Nazi party, Heinrich Himmler, who replaced Diels as the leader of the Gestapo, and Joseph Goebbels, who was the Nazi?s propaganda chief. Secondly, the videos explained the change in Martha Dodd?s position from a supporter of the Nazi campaign to her role in the Soviet Union?s intelligence group working against the Nazis. Thirdly, Erik Lawson explained his decision to name the book after the Tiergarten garden in Berlin where he believes most of the action occurred. Erik Lawson provided greater insight for these three major aspects of his book and many others through his Question and Answer session and his book discussion.	The Erik Larson interview helped to define the roles of three important Nazi leaders: Herman Göring, Heirich Himmler, and Joseph Goebbels. Heinrich Himmler was a chicken farmer who became a senior police officer and took over the Gestapo replacing Rudolf Diels as its commander (Q&A with Erik Larson at 33:14-34:45). Erik Larson describes him as ?A fairly mundane human, but a thoroughly evil human being.?(Q&A with Erik Larson 33:14-34:45) He held enough power to manipulate Hitler.  At one point, Himmler faked an assassination attempt and blamed Captain Röhm, which made Hitler think that Röhm was planning a rebellion. Herman Göring was a very large man and he was a flying ace in the previous Great War (Q&A with Erik Larson 34:45-36:22). William Dodd believed that Göring was reasonable and quite entertaining (Q&A with Erik Larson 34:45-36:22). He was extremely wealthy. Once he invited a number of guests to his estate for the sole purpose of showing off his affluence. Joseph Goebbels was the propaganda chief of the Nazi party. His job was to censor newspapers and suppress speeches in order to make the Nazi party seem attractive and powerful.	The two videos by C_SPAN helped to explain Martha?s transition from a supporter of the Nazi party to her support of the Soviet Union in its rebellion against the oppression of the Nazis. After her affair with Diels, she began to see the negative side of the Nazis and stopped trying to excuse their questionable behavior. After the ?Day of the Long Knives?, she completely withdrew any remaining support that she had for the Nazis. As a result of her relationship with Boris Winogradov, she started to support the Soviet Union in its resistance to the Nazis. The random assaults on innocent Americans also contributed to her resentment of the German regime. The combination of these assaults, the inside view of the Nazi regime granted to her by her relationship with Diels, and horror of ?the purge?, Martha found she could no longer support the Nazis and instead, found solace in the Soviet Union. (Q&A with Erik Larson 44:50 ? 48:80)	Although there were many other possible names for the book, Erik Larson chose ?In the Garden of Beasts? and the C_SPAN videos explained his choice. The name of his book in German is ?Tiergarten?. This is the name of the park where most of the action in the book is centered. The Dodds lived on Tiergratenstrasee, which is right next to the Tiergarten. The Tiegarten also provided a safe haven for diplomats who wanted to discuss delicate topics without any fear of a Nazi spy eavesdropping. In the end of the book, the Russians bombed the Tiergarten, which inevitably brought the war to Germany. Erik Larson named his book after the name of the park where most of the narrative takes place; he named it ?In the Garden of Beasts?.	After watching these two videos, three important parts of the book were clarified. Erik Larson differentiated between the roles of Herman Göring, Heinrich Himmler, and Joseph Goebbels. These three figures are essential to the plot of the book. He also explains the change in Martha?s position regarding the Nazi regime. He describes how she transitioned from an avid supporter and lover of Germany, to a near enemy of the state with her support of Germany?s enemy, the Soviet Union. Lastly, he explains the unique name of his book. The two videos from C-SPAN shined a light on three dark and foggy aspects of this book.