Connor Devitt
AP World History
Period 5

Chapter 1

	Chapter 1 begins with the beginnings of humanity, a very suitable place to start.  Diamond explains the origin of the modern human, the homo sapiens formed from the earlier homo erectus. Diamond talks about the Recent Era, when village life and agriculture began. From there, he talks about the spread of humans. All modern humans originated in Africa. From there they traveled to Europe, Asia, America, and to Australia. Diamond explains how early humans were able to travel to the Americas across the Bering Strait.  He also makes a point to discuss carbon dating.
	After explaining how humans came to populate every continent, Diamond discussed how and when tools arose.  In East Africa, the earliest human site containing stone tools and jewelry was dated to around 50,000 years ago.  This site was termed the ?Great Leap Forward?.  After the Great Leap Forward, New Guinea and Australia were able to be settled.  Much later, around the time when the world started to heat up, the Americas were able to be settled.
	This chapter focused on the beginnings of humanity, from the population of different continents to the early advantages that some continents had in terms of a head start.  Diamond talks about the path humans took and when humans started to develop stone tools.  He discusses different archaeological sites and how each one is very important to our understanding of early human history as well as, our understanding of humanity?s spread across the world. This first chapter starts with the beginnings of modern humans, which is the best place to start when attempting to all of history.Chapter 2
	This chapter begins to explain early human civilizations and their interactions.  Diamond gives an interaction example with the brutal end of the Moriori people near New Zealand at the hands of the aggressive Maori.  This was a small scale natural experiment of history where a well-equipped, more organized and more aggressive group wiped out a less-equipped, less organized, more peaceful culture.  In this experiment, Diamond explains how different environments give similar people advantages.  Every person in the Polynesian islands started from the same country with the same culture, but some islands were able to conquer many other islands. Diamond attributes these advantages to differences in the environment, for example some islands had more domesticable crops and animals that lead to powerful civilizations while others did not have any.
	Although this test is on a small scale compared to the whole world, its results are the same.  Europe, specifically the fertile crescent, had many domesticable crops and animals that yielded high outputs, but many out continents, like Australia, did not have any or very few domesticable crops and large animals.  A civilization?s environment and advantages or disadvantages may impact who will conquer who.
	In summary, this chapter explained the early ?collisions? between civilizations, specifically in the islands of Polynesia, New Guinea, and in Australia but in a lesser extent.   The role of the environment on things like technology, organization, leadership, and skills in the outcome of those collisions was discussed. In this chapter Diamond reveals one of the many ultimate causes that answers Yali?s question: some civilizations were able to conquer others because of early advantages in their environment.
Chapter 3
	Chapter 3 starts by discussing the colonization of the Americas by the Europeans  and discusses why the Americans were not able to fend off the Europeans.  This is one of the most important chapters because it provides very strong evidence for answering  Yali?s question.  This chapter discusses the collision between the Aztecs and the Spaniards in great detail.
	Diamond first discusses the interaction between the Aztec?s Atahuallpa and the Spaniards? Pizarro at Cajamarca.  Pizarro came with only 62 soldiers compared to the Aztec?s 80,000.  Atahuallpa?s army was only armed with light armor and clubs, while Pizarro?s army had horses, guns, and swords.  When the fighting began, the sounds of gunfire frightened the Aztec army.  Atahuallpa?s army could not hurt Pizarro?s men with their clubs because Pizarro?s men had steel plated armor.  In contrast, Pizarro?s men could cut right though the Aztecs with their steel swords  and horses. Before the Aztecs even encountered Pizarro?s men, most of them had died of European diseases because they had no resistance.  The Aztecs could not infect the Spaniards because they had no diseases of their own which only come about by being in close contact with animals. They only had a single domesticable animal and did not have any animal diseases.  
	The Aztecs were defeated by the Spaniards because they had poor weapons, no germ resistance, and no horses, guns, or steel protection.  Hence the name ?Guns, Germs, and Steel? is appropriate.  All of these reasons are proximate causes to the Aztec?s defeat.  Diamond explains that the ultimate cause was differences in their environments.  Europe had domesticable plants and animals that lead to civilization and strong technology and military, but the Americas had very few that were domesticable.
Chapter 4
	This short chapter talks about the main advantages that Pizarro?s men had over the Aztecs in terms of food production. Diamond talks about the differences in crops and how food production provided an advantage over hunter-gatherer lifestyles.  He also discusses the differences in domesticable large mammals that provided extra protein, milk, and a work force.  Lastly Diamond explains how the differences in population density allowed for economic specialization.
	The European civilization had a sedentary, farming society, while most of America was hunter-gatherers.  Food production yielded more calories that could feed more people than in hunter-gatherers environment.  In addition, food production yielded more food per acre than hunter-gathering which allowed higher population densities. Food production facilitated a higher birth rate (women could have children more frequently) contributing to higher population densities than could be achieved by hunter-gatherers.  Large domesticated animals were able to increase crop production by using its manure as a fertilizer and by providing additional pulling plows.
	As food production was intensified, food surpluses developed.  Food surpluses along with high population densities, allowed for economic specialization which means that some people could devote all their time to a craft or governing. These specialized people could make art and sell it for food, and others took jobs governing people.
	This chapter explained the major advantages that food producers enjoyed over hunter-gatherer and nomadic lifestyles.  Food production lead to higher population densities and economic specialization, but without large mammals, farming societies could not develop large food surpluses and economic specialization. 
Chapter 5
	Chapter 5 talks about the few centers where food production developed independently, how food production spread and where it never developed.  Food production had many independent origins and some possible independent origins.  Many of these sites do not include a full plant suite for a full sedentary lifestyle, but instead only a few domesticated plants.
	The Fertile Crescent is the most famous plant domestication site and had the most domesticated plants. These plants eventually spread to every continent, but a few crops were not accepted because they were not suitable for the environment.  Among all the world grains, the Fertile Crescent?s crops, including wheat and barley, produced the largest grains.  Other independent domestication sites include: China, Eastern US, and Mesoamerica.  There are a few sites that are not definitively an independent domestication site, or they just domesticated one or two crops.  These include West Africa, Sahel, Ethiopia, New Guinea, the Andes, and possibly Amazonia.
	If these independent domestication locations were highlighted on a map, it would be easy to see that most sites are in the Americas and in Africa.  This is because of their North-South axis which impedes the diffusion of crops, while the easier diffusion from East to West preempted any other independent domestication sites other than China and the Fertile Crescent. Diamond goes into this in much more detail in a later chapter.
	This chapter shows where and when plants were domesticated, and where food production arose, but this chapter reveals an important question.  Why did only a few places domesticate plants? Diamond focuses on this question for the rest of this book.

Chapter 6
	This chapter focuses on the advantages of food production over hunting and gathering and tells of some of the disadvantages of food production.  This chapter also explains why some places adopted food production and why other places did not.  Most importantly, Diamond discusses how farming is an auto-catalytic process.
	The early stages of farming had many disadvantages to hunting and gathering. Farmers had to work much longer and were much less nourished than hunter-gatherers. Farmers also suffered from much more severe diseases because they were in closer contact to animals which carried diseases.  On average farmers died at younger ages, but over time, the advantages grew and outnumbered the disadvantages.  So, in the beginning, very few hunter-gatherers abandoned their lifestyle to become farmers.  Because some people were forced to adopt farming due to lack of other food supplies, some regions got better farming and overcame the early disadvantages.
	 Part of the reason why farming grew and got better over time was because it was an auto-catalytic process. This means that as more people became farmers, higher population densities could be supported.  As population density rose, more food was needed and more people became farmers. 
	Diamond discussed a few reasons why hunter-gatherers turned to food production.  They include: the declining availability of wild food and game, the depletion of wild game due to increased populations, more advanced technologies that made work easier, and of course, high population densities which started food production?s auto-catalytic process. 	Chapter 7
	Chapter 7 focused on the domestication of plants. Although most of this book has been about plants and the domestication of plants, this chapter talks about how and why some plants are domesticated and what disqualifies other plants from being domesticated.
	There are a few qualities that make plant domestication possible and a few that make it much easier.  Size is a large factor.  As farmers choose plants to farm, they pick the largest to grow.  As the farmer discards smaller berries and replants the larger one, the plant will start to be domesticated into a larger fruit fit for eating.  Other visible factors that influence whether a plant will be domesticated are:  bitterness, how many seeds the plants produces, how much flesh the plant has, and how fibrous it is.  Farmers will grow fibrous plants to make cloths and only replant the most fibrous.  Other farmers may not like seeds so the only replant the fruits without seeds.
	Some qualities are not visible. Some plants germinate at different times during the year, so farmers replant those because they will provide food throughout the year. Farmers will replant seeds that do not take long to grow, they will not replant seeds that take a very long time to grow, like acorns. 
	One very important plant feature required to be able to be domesticated is that the plants must be able to pollinate themselves.  If one plant carries a useful mutation, but it must pollinate with another plant, it may lose that valuable mutation.  To prevent this, early farmers domesticated self-pollinating plants that carried on valuable mutations which in the long run, made domesticating the plant much easier and faster. 	
Chapter 8
	Chapter 8 focuses on why some areas of the world developed agriculture independently and why some areas developed it earlier than other areas.  Diamond gives two reasons why some areas did not develop agriculture or had a late start.  If the climate is able to support agriculture, but the people did not, the lack of agriculture could be attributable to either a cultural inhabitancy to develop agriculture, or there could be a lack of domesticable plants.  Diamond  uses most of the rest of this chapter to compare three centers of independent crop domestication.
	The first independent domestication site is the Fertile Crescent.  It lies within a Mediterranean climate. This means that during the rainy season, the crop will grow quickly and be harvested, but during the dry season, it will die.  These annual crops do not have to develop any protection (like bark), but instead, they produce large edible seeds.  The wild ancestors of the Fertile Crescent's crops were very productive which incited early hunter-gatherers to adopt agriculture.  Since they were already very productive, the wild crops did not have to change too much to be domesticated.  The last advantage that the Fertile Crescent had over other independent domestication sites was that most of its wild plants were self-pollinating.  This meant that the plants could be domesticated much faster and much more easily.
	The other two independent domestication sites that Diamond discusses, America and New Guinea, had major disadvantages compared to the Fertile Crescent. Both had few high producing crops and very small seeded grains which limited calorie intake. Both sites had a limited suite of crops to domesticate so early hunter-gatherers were not encouraged to abandon their productive lifestyles for food production.
Chapter 9
	This important chapter explains why so few animals were domesticated around the world.  Diamond uses the Anna Karenina principle as an analogy to large mammal domestication. This chapter  provides a definitive answer to why the Fertile Crescent had such an advantage to all other food producing sites across the world.  It is because the Fertile Crescent started with more compatible domesticable animals than any other place.  This chapter provides specific qualities that domesticable animals must have.
	These following factors explain why only 14 of 138 possible domesticable mammals were actually domesticated.  The diet of an animal must be efficient.  No carnivore was ever domesticated because they require too much food to grow, while herbivores do not need as much food, making them a favorite choice.  Animals must grow quickly just like crops to be worth taking the time, food, and energy to domesticate. Animals must be able to reproduce in captivity.  Farmers cannot domesticate animals that can only live and reproduce in the wild.  The candidate must not be too aggressive. Early farmers would not domesticate animals that would attempt to kill them. Some animals panic in the presence of humans and while they are in captivity which disqualifies them.  The last factor influencing animal domestication is that they need a social structure so humans can implant themselves as their leader making all the animals submissive to humans.
	The Anna Karenina principle states that all these factors must be present so an animal can be domesticated, but if one is missing, that animal cannot be domesticated. Europe?s Fertile Crescent had an early advantage because the majority of domesticable animals resided within Europe. 
Chapter 10
	This chapter is even more important than the previous one in terms of uncovering the ultimate cause for answering Yali?s question.  This chapter explains the importance of the major axis of each continent and the effect that has on the diffusion of ideas, technology, and agriculture.  Diamond explains why this factor lead to the major differences in technology between every continent.
	Crops accustom to certain weather patterns can only thrive in those same conditions and take a long time to adapt to other conditions.  Weather patterns tend to vary little along latitudinal lines.  This means that plants do not have to adapt to new conditions if they are in the same latitude and so that they can spread faster from East to West or West to East.  If someone tries to spread a crop North or South, it will take a very long time to adapt to the new environment and to be able to grow abundantly. In short, a crop?s ability to diffuse across a continent is limited when trying to cross longitudinal lines, but will diffuses much faster if it travels along latitudinal lines.
	This fact hold for plants and animals only.  An idea is not hindered directly by climate differences, but rather an idea is indirectly hindered by climate changes.  A idea must diffuse with crops because ideas spread with people who need food.  Thus, ideas, crops, and animals diffuse faster when traveling East or West, but much slower when traveling North or South.  This gives the whole continent of Eurasia a huge advantage over Africa and America.  Civilizations in Eurasia could trade with each other much faster resulting in more advanced civilizations and technology.  Other continents could not trade as easily because they are limited by the direction of their major axis.
	Chapter 11
	This chapter discusses the importance of diseases in civilization and conquest, and how they arose.  Diamond first discusses how major epidemics and other diseases developed from contact with animals. Diamond begins with a discussion of the evolution of diseases.
	Diseases evolve to spread and infect as many creatures as possible by any means that they can. Some wait for their host to get eaten so they can infect every animal that takes a bite out of their old host.  Others live in the saliva of their host and spread when its host bites another creature. Some change their host to speed up their spread (like smallpox?s sores).  Some cause a reaction, like a sneeze, to shoot itself to another host.  Diseases do not just evolve to spread but, they also develop defenses against their host so that they can survive longer and possibly infect more creatures. 
	To spread diseases, there needs to be enough creatures to infect and they need to be dense enough to spread and infect new hosts. This is why hunter-gatherers do not encounter major diseases that wipe out whole populations. The germs are not dense enough or numerous enough to spread the disease, but when food production was developed, population density rose. This rise in population and population density allowed epidemics to form.  The sedentary lifestyle of farmer also increased the spread of disease.  Epidemics (or crowd diseases) need to spread though populations quickly and kill as many as possible.  Those who survive may develop resistance.  The farmers passed along germs that influenced the outcome of conquests when other cultures had no previous exposure and weren?t able to develop resistance.Chapter 12
	This chapter explains the origins of writing systems across the world.  Diamond explains the different types of writing, the challenging of developing one, and where writing systems were invented.  Writing enabled empires to rule with greater control, allowed knowledge to be written down for the future, and allowed information to be transmitted with greater accuracy.
	Of all writing system developed, three techniques were used.  The alphabet, logograms, and syllabaries. The alphabet assigns a symbol(s) to each sound of the oral language.  Most alphabets only have 20 to 30 symbols, but most cultures have more sounds to represent, so a combinations of letters might be used to represent those not directly assigned a symbol. 
	The second, logograms, uses one sign to represent one word. For example, dog would have its own sign instead of being made up of three signs: d-o-g. This technique is used in China, Korea, Japan, Cuneiform, Hieroglyphs, and the Maya glyphs. 
	The third, syllabaries, is the most abstract, syllabaries. It assigns one sign to each syllable.  This technique would assign one sign to the syllable ?atten? and ?-tion?, and the two put together would make ?attention?.  This was the most popular technique of the ancient times. 	
	Of all languages invented, most were a combination of two of three of these techniques.  The first writing system was the Sumerian Cuneiform in the Fertile Crescent area.  Another early system, the Maya glyphs, had its origin in America.  Two others, in China and Egypt, could be of an independent origin, but are not definitively proven yet.
Chapter 13
	This chapter is about technology.  Diamond discusses the development, acceptance, and spread of technology.  First Diamond clears up something called the ?Heroic Theory of Invention?:  ?Necessity is the mother of invention?, (not really according to Diamond).  Then, Diamond explains how receptivity of societies determines the future of them.  Lastly, he talks about how inventions are spread.
	The ?Heroic Theory of Invention? is wrong, and in fact, invention is the mother of necessity.  Only a few examples of inventions support the traditional theory that things are invented because they are needed.  According to Diamond, inventors tinker around with objects and eventually invent something, which they later find a use for.  Very few inventions were developed to solve a specific problem and end up actually solving that problem.  So an inventor either invents something and then finds a use for it, or invents something to solve a problem, but  it is readapted to do something completely different.
	Not every society accepts every invention right away for whatever reason. Whether is goes against a law or religion, or because it is not very useful, it often takes some time to be adopted.  However, many inventions must be adopted to preserve the society.  For example, the cannon was not adopted in every European society, but the ones who did were able to conquer all those who did not.  The only exceptions to this are to civilizations on remote and isolated islands (like Australia, some Polynesian Islands, and parts of America which were later conquered anyway).
	Technology is diffused in two ways: by borrowing and by re-inventing. When a technology is borrowed, it is transmitted to the new society.  When a society sees an invention and knows no specific application it is re-invented and varies from the original.
Chapter 14
	The main focus of this chapter is to analyze the four types of civilization. Diamond describes Tribes, Bands, Chiefdoms, and finally, States.
	Tribes are the smallest of the four main classifications of societies and consist of a fixed settlement or herders who move seasonally.  Usually, only a few hundred belong to a tribe and consist of more than one kinship group (or extended family).  Tribes are often egalitarian, meaning that everyone participates in decision making. The most influential person who leads discussions is termed the ?big-man?, but has no power and no special clothes or residence.  There is no economic specialization and the economy is based on exchanges between families.  Bands are somewhat larger than tribes, but everyone still knows everybody else by name.
	Chiefdoms are much larger and have a centralized government.  They include thousands to tens of thousands of people.  This created a problem in ancient civilizations.  For the first time, people had to learn to meet strangers and not kill them, before everybody knew everybody else.  The role of Chief was created to keep people from killing each other.  They were assigned by hereditary right.  They were easily distinguishable, unlike the ?big-man? in bands and tribes.  They had economic specialization and enforced taxes on the people.	
	States are much larger, have more economic specialization, and more powerful leadership than chiefdoms.  The political leader has people working under him, rules more area, has much more military power, and requires more taxes.  States have larger monuments, state religions, and includes hundreds of thousands to millions or perhaps, billions of people. This is the social structure that people today live in.
Chapter 15
	Chapter 15 explains why New Guinea and Australia were not able to conquer the Europeans.  Diamond first explains the origins of the two ?hemi-continents?.  Both populations started out from Asia (China specifically) and colonized all habitable islands in the Polynesian chain.  Diamond refutes the idea that differences among the people of New Guinea and Australia were the cause of their lag in technology, but instead explains that differences in geography and the crop and animal domestication suite was to blame.
	New Guinea was able to develop 1,000 diverse languages and was able to domesticate many plants.  They were not able to have a full sedentary lifestyle because their crops did not provide all the nutrients that were needed.  Their crops could not provide New Guinea?s people with enough calories, and they could not use animals (for meat or labor) because they had no domesticable animals.  Later, they received dogs, chickens, and pigs from Asia that they could eat.  Their geography was not ideal, but was good enough for food production.  The reason why New Guinea lagged was due to their original set of domesticable plants that did not provide everything that they needed, and due to the fact that they had no domesticable large mammals.
	Australia?s problem is much more simple.  Most of its land is desert which cannot support food production which leaves Australia?s people to be hunter-gatherers. Australia also had no domesticable plants and no domesticable large mammals. This meant that Australia was doomed to fail even before it was colonized.  European conquerers were able to settle Australia because of their pre-domesticated crops, advanced technology, and domesticated large mammals.
Chapter 16
	In this chapter, Diamond talks about China?s seeming unity:  linguistically, politically, and geographically.  Diamond takes most of this chapter to compare China?s unity with the disunity of Europe.  China has been unified since 221 B.C. and Europe has yet to be unified.  Of China?s 1.2 billion people, over 800 million speak a single language, Mandarin.  Of the 400 million other people in China who do not speak Mandarin, 300 million speak a language similar to Mandarin.
	Within China, there are four families of languages. The Sino-Tibetan family includes Mandarin and all languages close to it.  This family is distributed throughout all of China. The other three families have scattered speakers across the country.  The first, Miao-Yao, had about 6 million speakers and five languages.  Most are refugees from Vietnam. The next family that Diamond talks about is the Austroasiatic (including Cambodian and Vietnamese).  There are 60 million speakers of this language family. The speakers range from Vietnam to the Malay peninsula.  The last family Diamond discusses is the Tai-Kadai family of 50 million speakers. These speakers are from Thailand, South China, and Myanmar. 
	China was among the world?s only independent agriculture domestication sites. According to Diamond, China might even contain two centers (North and South China). Like the Fertile Crescent, it had many domesticable plants and animals including pigs, dogs, chickens, water buffalo, silkworms, ducks, and geese.  China?s domestication suite allowed it to gain an early advantage over other civilizations across the world, and later its political unity allowed it to be the most advanced technological country in the world. 	
Chapter 17
	This chapter covers the important topic of the Austronesian expansion which is one of the largest population movements in history.  Diamond discusses the important topic about the way linguistics can trace population by analyzing trace remains of a language.
	The Polynesian Islands offer a unique view of history because it shows how geography effects history.  The islands that started with a better plant suite ended up conquering the other islands of small tribes or hunter-gatherers and implanted their language on the new islands.  As Diamond explains, modern linguistics can trace the path of these early conquerers by tracing language remains.  As one civilization conquers another, they will leave their language on that island which will invariably change with time, but by analyzing these languages, a linguist can trace the path of the dominant civilization.
	In the Austronesian expansion, Asian people left to colonize and explore the Polynesian Islands.  The native people and native language of each island were killed by the more advanced conquerors from Asia, except for the natives on New Guinea.  No society on any of the Polynesian Islands had developed agriculture.  The island people consisted of small bands of hunter-gatherers until arrival of conquerors from Asia and Europe. This does not hold true for the New Guineans who did have food production and a few domesticated animals that they received from Asia.  Their contact with these animals and the tropical environment meant that the conquerers from Asia died from the diseases in New Guinea and only penetrated the island to the northern shore. 

Chapter 18
	This chapter talks about an issue addressed in the beginning of the book.  It addresses why the European conquistadors were able to conquer America.  Diamond talks about the main advantages that Europe had over America.
	According to Diamond, there were three main reason why Europe conquered America and of course, many more smaller reasons.  Europe had thirteen times more large domestic mammals than America had.  All of these animals provided meat to the Europeans, milk in some cases, leather for clothes, and most important, labor.  These animals could pull plows that allowed more land to be cultivated and thus create an agricultural surplus that lead to larger economic specialization.  With more economic specialization, Europe was able to have a stronger military and a much more powerful government.
	The second reason was that Europe started with more domesticable plants which also lead to more surpluses and economic specialization.  Compared to the crops in America, Europe?s crops provided many more calories with less effort and many more valuable nutrients.
	The third reason concerned the major axis of each continent.  Europe had an East-West axis that encouraged the spread of ideas, technology, crops, and animals that allowed Europe to benefit from a whole continent?s worth of technology.  The Americas had a North-South axis which discourages diffusion, so each civilization was almost completely alone.  The societies in America could not trade or compete which slowed the development of technologies.  Every society had to invent every technology for themselves, so each technology took longer to develop in America than in Europe.
Chapter 19
	This chapter discusses ?how Africa became black?.  By that, Diamond meant how one race conquered all of Africa except for the North.  Diamond starts by discussing the five divisions of humanity in Africa: Whites, Blacks, African Pygmies, Asians and Khoisan.  The Pygmies and Khoisan are both hunter-gatherer societies.  The Blacks of central Africa, which benefitted from a better plant suite and terrain, were able to conquer all of South Africa implanting their language as they went.  This left the Pygmies to live and hunt in the undesirable Sahara Desert where the Blacks could not farm.  The Khoisan were forced to flee to the most Southern tip of Africa and were later conquered by European colonists.
	The Blacks implanted their language on the remaining natives that they conquered.  As they traveled south through Africa, they left behind remains of their language. Linguists, using the technique mentioned in chapter 17, were able to follow the Blacks? conquest through Africa by analyzing trace remains of the original language. 
	Diamond also talks about an anomaly in Madagascar where Austronesian languages where found.  This is strange because of Madagascar?s great distance from the Polynesian Islands which must mean that the peoples of Polynesia had sturdy ocean-going water crafts.  Linguistics can deduce the original origins of those two hunter-gatherer races that were eliminated by the Blacks by using the linguistic technique. When the Blacks invaded, they did not destroy all remains of the native language and did not kill every native person.  Linguists can search for the native language remains to find the original home to the Pygmies and Khoisan.  Those who were not killed worked for the Blacks.
