Advertisers, publicists, and celebrities attempt to make themselves or their advertisements stickier in order to grab public interest and attention. Some advertisers and many celebrities make a concerted effort to stay ahead of any new trends in their public audience to stay popular such as the Airwalk Company. Other advertisers implement subtle tactics, like a treasure hunt, to make their ads more memorable and thus, more effective. Over time, advertising tactics used to grab public attention have been refined to follow popular trends and ideas. In addition to becoming more sophisticated, advertisements have also become more numerous. Advertisers are forced to make their ads stickier in order to counterbalance the desensitization to ads that comes with a flood of ads shown over short periods of time. Celebrities, publicists, and especially advertisers need to make their advertisements and publicity campaigns more sophisticated in order to effectively engage public attention and stay popular. 	In order for a company to be successful, it must stay ahead of all other competition and it must be able to set the popular trends in its respective field. The shoe company, Airwalk, is a perfect example. Under the direction of the Lambesis advertising company, Airwalk shoes were cool. The shoes were advertised in a unique and sophisticated way. The company advertised the shoe in a way people would not forget while showing off the shoe?s unique fashion. The company hired people, like DeeDee Gordon, to find what was fashionable and in style. Airwalks used this information to stay cool and ahead of the fashion trends across America. Because of Lambesis?s advertisements, and Airwalk?s ability to stay in fashion, the company was extremely successful. To become a successful company and remain successful, it must be able to stay ahead of any popular trends, like a fashion trend, and it must be able to advertise itself successfully.	Over time, advertising techniques have become more refined and precise. Take Columbia Records for example. Columbia Records used to put advertisements in magazines or play them on the television. This tactic did not work extremely well. People would see the ad, but they would not remember it or act on it. Their advertisements were not sticky enough. The company decided to perform an experiment to find the best way to advertise. Lester Wunderman came up with the successful strategy of a treasure hunt. The treasure hunt was a small gold box placed on a paper advertisement. If a customer found the box, then they could get any record that they wanted. This simple tactic enticed people to read and follow up on Columbia Record?s advertisements. The company?s sales went up dramatically because of this one small, simple advertising technique. Over time, advertisements change from simple ineffective tactics to much more refined, subtle, and effective techniques. The effectiveness of a company?s advertisements is the difference between success and bankruptcy.	People have become desensitized to commercials because of the sheer number of advertisements that they are exposed to on a daily basis. The average time devoted to advertisements in one hour of television has increased from six minutes to nine minutes. The average American is exposed to about 254 difference advertisements a day. According to one study, the effectiveness of any commercial is negated when at least four commercials of 15 seconds are shown in one break. To combat the desensitization of people towards commercials, advertisements need to become stickier to eliminate all other commercials. As a culture, Americans have already become desensitized to advertisements. People are not able to remember or even act on every commercial that they see. They are too numerous. The more commercials that are shown, no matter how effective, the less people will respond to the commercials.	Advertisers need to make advertisements extremely sticky in order for their company to succeed. Companies need to keep up with trends and advertise effectively to become and stay successful. Advertisements need to be sophisticated and unique to be effective, like Lambesis? advertisements for Airwalks. Ads need to evolve to be able to capture their target audience. To become a truly successful, a company must find a way around people?s desensitization towards advertisements. If a company cannot grab a person?s attention, then it has no chance of success. Companies use clever advertising and constantly up to date products in order to maximize their chances of success.